Artificial Intelligence

CMSC671

Instructor: Professor Yun Peng
ITE Building Room 341
(410)455-3816
ypeng@umbc.edu

Some material adopted from notes by
    Charles R. Dyer, University of Wisconsin-Madison and
    Tim Finin and Marie desJargins, University of Maryland 
         Baltimore County
Introduction 

Chapter 1
What is artificial intelligence? 
There are no clear consensus on the definition of AI
Here’s one from John McCarthy, (He coined the phrase AI in 1956) - see http:// www. formal. Stanford. EDU/ jmc/ whatisai/)
Q. What is artificial intelligence?
A. It is the science and engineering of making intelligent machines, especially intelligent computer programs. It is related to the similar task of using computers to understand human intelligence, but AI does not have to confine itself to methods that are biologically observable.
Q. Yes, but what is intelligence?
A. Intelligence is the computational part of the ability to achieve goals in the world. Varying kinds and degrees of intelligence occur in people, many animals and some machines.
Other possible AI definitions
Collection of hard problems which can be solved by humans and other living things, but for which we don’t have good algorithms for solving. 
e. g., understanding spoken natural language, medical diagnosis, circuit design, learning, self-adaptation, reasoning, chess playing, proving math theories, etc.
•   Definition from R & N book: a program that
Acts like human (Turing test)
Thinks like human (human-like patterns of thinking steps)
Acts or thinks rationally (logically, correctly)
•   Some problems used to be thought of as AI but are now considered not
e. g., symbolic mathematics in 1965, pattern recognition in 1970

What’s easy and what’s hard?
It’s been easier to mechanize many of the high level cognitive tasks we usually associate with “intelligence” in people
 e. g., symbolic integration, proving theorems, playing chess, some aspect of medical diagnosis, etc.
It’s been very hard to mechanize tasks that animals can do easily
walking around without running into things
catching prey and avoiding predators
interpreting complex sensory information (visual, aural, …)
modeling the internal states of other animals from their behavior
working as a team (ants, bees)
Is there a fundamental difference between the two categories?
Why some complex problems (e.g., solving differential equations, database operations) are not subjects of AI
Foundations of AI
Computer
Science & 
Engineering
AI
Mathematics
Cognitive
Science
Philosophy
Psychology
Linguistics
Biology
Economics
computer hardware and software
rules of reasoning
logic, algorithms, optimization
high level human/animal thinking
human/animal brain activity
complex systems games
communication
History of AI
The birth of AI (1943 – 1956)
Pitts and McCulloch (1943): simplified mathematical model of neurons (resting/firing states) can realize all propositional logic primitives (can compute all Turing computable functions)
Allen Turing: Turing machine and Turing test (1950)
Claude Shannon: information theory; early game theory, possibility of chess playing computers
Tracing back to Boole, Aristotle, Euclid (logics, syllogisms, algebra of symbols)
Early enthusiasm (1952 – 1969)
1956 Dartmouth conference
	John McCarthy (Lisp);
	Marvin Minsky (first neural network machine);
	Alan Newell and Herbert Simon (GPS);
Emphasize on intelligent general problem solving
	Heuristics of human problem solving (means-ends analysis in GPS );
	Resolution by John Robinson (basis for automatic theorem proving);
	heuristic search (A*, AO*, game tree search)
Emphasis on knowledge (1966 – 1974)
domain specific knowledge is the key to overcome existing difficulties
knowledge representation (KR) paradigms
declarative vs. procedural representation

Knowledge-based systems (1969 – 1979)
DENDRAL: the first knowledge intensive system (determining 3D structures of complex chemical compounds)
MYCIN: first rule-based expert system (containing 450 rules for diagnosing blood infectious diseases)
	EMYCIN: an ES shell
PROSPECTOR: first knowledge-based system that made significant profit (geological ES for mineral deposits)
AI became an industry (1980 – 1989)
wide applications in various domains
commercially available tools
Current trends (1990 – present)
more realistic goals 
more practical (application oriented)
resurgence of neural networks and emergence of genetic algorithms
distributed AI, intelligent agents, and semantic web
Possible Approaches
What can AI systems do
Here are some example applications
Computer vision: face recognition from a large set
Robotics: autonomous (mostly) automobile
Natural language processing: simple machine translation
Expert systems: medical diagnosis in a narrow domain
Spoken language systems: ~1000 word continuous speech
Planning and scheduling: Hubble Telescope experiments
Learning: text categorization into ~1000 topics
User modeling: Bayesian reasoning in Windows help (the infamous paper clip…)
Games: Grand Master level in chess (world champion), checkers, etc.
What can’t AI systems do yet?
Understand natural language robustly (e.g., read and understand articles in a newspaper)
Surf the web
Interpret an arbitrary visual scene
Learn a natural language
Play Go well
Construct plans in dynamic real-time domains
Refocus attention in complex environments
Perform life-long learning
Exhibit true autonomy and intelligence!